GRADUATE ADMISSION PROCEDURES

The department deadline for completed applications is September 15 for Spring entry and February 1 for Fall entry.  There is no departmental application fee.

Admission to the Computer Science Department is a two-step process.  You will also need to submit the Graduate College Admissions Office application (which will be sent to you soon) to be formally admitted to the University and the Graduate College.  Admission to BOTH the Department and the University is required before registration in classes or your stipend commences.

The following materials are to be submitted to the Computer Science Department if you wish to be considered for admission to the graduate program, and become eligible for teaching assistantships, research assistantships, and fellowships.

Computer Science Course Evaluation Form:  This is a departmental form.  The form must be complete and include the grade, mark, score, or percentage received in the coursework listed.   Without a complete form, your application will not be reviewed.  It can be printed, completed by hand, and mailed with your application materials.   It can also be downloaded, completed, and returned as an email attachment, as HTML, or scanned and sent to grad_adm@cs.iastate.edu. 

Letters of Recommendation:  Three (3) persons who can estimate your scientific potential (preferably faculty with whom you have worked) should write recommendation letters on the recommended forms available at www.grad-college.iastate.edu/formsf/ltrrec.doc (MS Word 6.0 is required for this form).  Should your recommendation authors prefer not to use this form, please request the recommendation be on university/company letterhead and be accompanied by the form.  Please note that you should circle and sign the section indicating whether you waive or do not waive your rights under the 1974 Family Education Rights and Privacy Act.

GRE:  GRE scores are required for all applicants.  You are not required to take the 'subject' test in Computer Science but it is recommended.  Results from the GRE exams are necessary to determine whether you have an adequate knowledge in computer science to be successful in the CS program.  These scores are also required for various scholarship, fellowship, and award nominations. Applications can be evaluated with a photocopy but originals must be received before admission in the fall.  Testing information can be found at www.gre.org.

The following materials must be received by Graduate Admissions before the designated departmental deadline. The Graduate College Admissions application form and graduate admissions information may be found at: http://www.grad-college.iastate.edu/.

Application for Admission to the Graduate College/Admissions Office: You may request the application for university admission from the Graduate Admissions Office.  (The downloadable form requires MS Word 6.0).  However, it will be much quicker if you download or print the forms.  It may take several weeks to receive the forms in hard copy by postal mail.  The application must be received with the appropriate application fee.  The application is not reviewed without the application fee.  There are no application fee waivers granted by the university.

Official transcripts (and correct certified English translations from any foreign institution):  Transcripts signed and stamped with school seal are required. 

TOEFL Score:  The Computer Science Department requires a minimum total score of 550 (paper test) or 213 (computer test).  We require all students from countries where English is not the only official language, and who have not received a college/university degree from ISU, to provide a TOEFL score.  If you have also taken the TSE (Test of Spoken English) exam, we encourage you to submit those results as well.  More testing information can be found at www.toefl.org.

Since it takes approximately 4-6 weeks for the official copy of your GRE and TOEFL scores to reach ISU, please take your test early enough to allow the scores to reach ISU by the due dates. When the testing institutions do send the official score it automatically goes to the Graduate Admissions Office of whichever college/university you have designated. Applications can be evaluated with a photocopy but originals must be received before admission in the fall.

Form 1A:  Request the Registrar of the college where you received (or will receive) your BS/BE/MS degree to fill out and forward this form (usually with your official transcript).  Note that MS Word 6.0 is required for the downloadable form available at ____________________.

If the materials required by Graduate Admissions are sent to Computer Science, we will forward the originals to Graduate Admissions. 

Note that you must be admitted by the Computer Science Department before you are admitted to the University. If your application is complete by the due date, it may take 2-3 months to receive admission, scholarship, and assistantship information.  Remember that the housing application is not sent (and the processing of the IAP-66 or I-20 form cannot be started) until you have been formally admitted by the Graduate College Admissions Office.

However, if you request that our department send you application materials we will forward your request to Graduate Admissions.  You do not need to do this.
