Graduate Funding

Graduate Assistantships
The Computer Science Department does have a limited number of assistantships available (the number will vary from year to year).  The assistantship qualifies you as a C-base employee which gives you resident tuition. Other benefits include scholarship credit towards your tuition (one half reduction of  resident tuition), enrollment in the student health insurance plan, reduced and tuition for your spouse. The assistantship is considered to be a one-half time position and you are required to work at least 20 hours a week, maintain a 3.0 grade point average, and take no more than 12 credits in both the fall and spring semesters and 7 in the summer session. 

Teaching Assistantships
All students admitted to the Computer Science Graduate Program are evaluated for teaching assistantships after all applications have been finalized.   Students do not need to apply for teaching assistantship (TA) positions.  These positions are given on academic merit, graduate research potential, letters of reference, and TOEFL score.  Teaching assistantships are generally continued throughout the duration of the program if the student is performing well in their TA duties, their academic performance is satisfactory, and there is continued funding available. Teaching assistantships are also available from other departments and the student is usually able to secure these positions after arriving at ISU.

Research Assistantships
Most students who receive research assistantships are chosen by the faculty member when there is an opening in his/her research program and there is available funding.  Many students are supported by research grants from their major professor.  Sometimes this will be arranged between the student and the professor prior to arrival here at ISU. Generally, they are arranged after the student has been in the department for a period of time.  Occasionally, the department is given funding to bring highly qualified students to ISU, and these are chosen by the Graduate Admissions Committee from the admitted students.  Research assistantships are continued if the student performs well in his research duties and funding is continued for the research.  

Research assistantships are generally available from other departments on campus as well.  They will be found before or during the first two weeks of classes.  Sometimes the department is aware of the position and will give you the information.  However, there are several openings each semester that the department does not know about.  If a student searches for a position, they are generally able to find funding within the first semester.

PACE Scholarship Award
Each year the Graduate College awards 20-30 incoming Computer Science students with this tuition scholarship.  The scholarship is based on academic performance, research experience, GRE and TOEFL test scores.  The student may receive the award for one or two years and the duration is determined during the scholarship review.  The department nominates students for this award.


